                          +----------------+
                          |    JUMBOMEM    |
                          |                |
                          |  Scott Pakin   |
                          | pakin@lanl.gov |
                          +----------------+


Description
===========

JumboMem provides a low-effort solution to the problem of running
memory-hungry programs on memory-starved computers.  The JumboMem
middleware gives programs access to all of the memory in an entire
workstation cluster, providing the illusion that all of the memory
resides within a single computer.  When a program exceeds the memory
in one computer, it automatically spills over into the memory of the
next computer.  Behind the scenes, JumboMem handles all of the network
communication required to make this work; the user's program does not
need to be modified -- not even recompiled -- to take advantage of
JumboMem.  Furthermore, JumboMem does not need administrator
privileges to install.  Any ordinary user with an account on a Linux
cluster has sufficient privileges to install and run JumboMem.


System requirements
===================

Don't bother with JumboMem if you can't meet all of the following
requirements:

   * You must have access to a cluster of at least three workstations,
     preferably many more.

   * All workstations must be networked together, preferably over a
     high-speed network that provides user-level access to
     communication (e.g., InfiniBand, Myrinet, or QsNet).

   * All workstations must be capable of 64-bit addressing.

   * All workstations must be running Linux.  Other Unix-based
     operating systems may also work but have not been tested with
     JumboMem.  LD_PRELOAD support is critical.


Installation
============

JumboMem builds using SCons (http://www.scons.org/) instead of the
more common Make.  SCons is freely available from
http://www.scons.org/.  See the INSTALL file for more information.


Copyright and license
=====================

Copyright (C) 2010 Los Alamos National Security, LLC

This material was produced under U.S. Government contract
DE-AC52-06NA25396 for Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL), which is
operated by Los Alamos National Security, LLC for the U.S. Department
of Energy.  The U.S. Government has rights to use, reproduce, and
distribute this software.  NEITHER THE GOVERNMENT NOR LOS ALAMOS
NATIONAL SECURITY, LLC MAKES ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, OR
ASSUMES ANY LIABILITY FOR THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE.  If software is
modified to produce derivative works, such modified software should be
clearly marked so as not to confuse it with the version available from
LANL.

Additionally, this program is free software; you can redistribute it
and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
published by the Free Software Foundation; version 2.0 of the License.
Accordingly, this program is distributed in the hope that it will be
useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
General Public License for more details.
